# Undocumented features of the .h3m file format

This document describes undocumented features of the .h3m file format used in "Heroes of Might and Magic III: **The Shadow of Death**". It doesn't cover other versions of the game (e.g., "The Restoration of Erathia") or mods.

Note that the source code of [*h3mtxt*](https://github.com/alexanderbelous/h3mtxt) provides more detailed comments for the undocumented features. This document serves 2 purposes:
* List all undocumented features on a single page.
* Make it understandable for people without programming skills.

Each section below describes a data member of [`h3m::Map`](../src/h3mtxt/Map/Map.h), i.e. of the root element of the JSON document generated by *h3mtxt*.

## `basic_info` (type [`h3m::MapBasicInfo`](../src/h3mtxt/Map/MapBasicInfo.h))
* `map_size`: The Map Editor only supports 4 values: 36, 72, 108 and 144, but technically you can use any 32-bit integer here. The Unleashed Editor also supports 18, 180, 216 and 252. However:
  * Values > 256 are somewhat useless, because X and Y coordinates of each object on the Adventure Map must be within [0; 255].
  * The game seems to crash if the value is greater than 292.
* `name`: The Map Editor has a limit of 30 characters; you can use longer names, but it's somewhat useless:
  * The game only shows the first 22 characters in "Available Scenarios".
  * The game only shows the first 29 characters in "Scenario Information".
  * The Map Editor only shows the first 30 characters.
* `description`: The Map Editor has a limit of 300 characters, but you can use longer strings:
  * Only the first 300 characters will be displayed in the main menu and in the Map Editor.
  * "Scenario Information" will display the full text.
* `max_hero_level`: The Map Editor only allows values from [1; 99], but any 8-bit integer can be used here. This works as intended for "normal" levels [1; 74], but it's possible to limit hero experience level to some "abnormal" levels too:

  | `max_hero_level` | Actual limit |
  | ---------------- | ------------ |
  |               75 |           88 |
  |               89 |          100 |
  |              101 |          108 |
  |              109 |          868 |
## `players` (type [`h3m::PlayerSpecs`](../src/h3mtxt/Map/PlayerSpecs.h))
* `main_town`: You can specify a town that doesn't belong to the player in the beginning of the game as their main town (i.e. a neutral, ally's or enemy's town). You can even set `generate_hero` to `1` for that town, and a hero will be indeed generated in it.
* `has_random_heroes`: You can set this field to `1` even if the player doesn't actually have random heroes in the beginning of the game. In this case, the player will be offered to choose a starting hero, but the chosen hero will not be one of the starting heroes.
* `starting_hero`: You can "lie" in this field, specifying any `HeroType`, portrait or name. The game will display this data in the main menu, but it will have no impact once you start the game.  
## `additional_info` (type [`h3m::MapAdditionalInfo`](../src/h3mtxt/Map/MapAdditionalInfo.h))
* `victory_condition`
  * `allow_normal_win` and `applies_to_computer` can be modified for any special victory condtion, even though the Map Editor doesn't allow modifying it for some victory condition types.
  * `AcquireArtifact`: any artifact can be used here, including the weird ones (e.g., `Spellbook`, `Ballista`, `DiplomatsSuit`).
  * `AccumulateCreatures`: the Map Editor only allows using a value from [1; 99,999] for the number of creatures, but you can use any signed 32-bit integer (e.g., 1,000,000 Peasants).
  * `AccumulateResources`: the Map Editor only allows using a value from [1; 9,999,999] for the amount, but you can use any signed 32-bit integer (e.g., 1,000,000,000 Gems).
  * `TransportArtifact`: unusual artifacts (e.g., `Spellbook`) can be used here, even though the Map Editor doesn't support them.
  * **2 undocumented special victory conditions:**
    * `DefeatAllMonsters`
    * `SurviveBeyondATimeLimit`
* `loss_condition`
  * `TimeExpires`: the Map Editor only allows a number from a small set (2-6 days, 1-7 weeks, 2-12 months), but any signed 16-bit intger can be used here (e.g., 32767 days).
* `heroes_availability`: You can enable Lord Haart (Estates specialist); the Unleashed Editor also supports this.
* `disabled_skills`: The Map Editor forces at least 4 skills to be enabled, but you can disable any of them if you want; the Unleashed Editor also supports this.
* `heroes_settings`
  * `experience`: the Map Editor only allows values from [0; 99,999,999], but any signed 32-bit integer can be used here. Note that the game will freeze at start if you try to set a value >= 2,147,400,657. See [ExperienceLevels.h](../src/h3mtxt/Map/Constants/ExperienceLevels.h) for more details.
  * `secondary_skills`: "hexed" secondary skills can be used here. See [SecondarySkillLevel.h](../src/h3mtxt/Map/Constants/SecondarySkillLevel.h) for more details.
  * `artifacts`: "weird" artifacts can be put in the backpack (e.g., `Spellbook`).
  * `spells`: `Titan's Lightning Bolt` can be enabled.
  * `primary_skills`: The Map Editor only allows values from [1; 99], but any signed 8-bit integer can be used here (e.g., 127 or -128).
## `tiles` (type [`h3m::Tile`](../src/h3mtxt/Map/Tile.h))
* Neither the Map Editor nor the Unleashed Editor allow manually selecting the sprite for terrain/river/road, but this can be done via `h3mtxt`.
* `flags`: any flag can be set/unset for any tile. Most of them are decorative (i.e. they only change how the tile looks, not the game mechanics), but `h3m::TileFlag::Coast` isn't:
  1. If set to 1, it overrides the battlefield terrain for this tile (the battle will take place on the coast).
    * Water tiles are **not** affected - even if you set the coast bit to 1 for a Water tile, the battlefield for this tile will still be the ship deck.
    * Rock tiles **are** affected. Note that normally the game crashes if you start a battle on a Rock tile; setting the coast bit to 1 fixes this.
  2. It controls whether landing is possible on this tile: a hero on a boat cannot land on a tile with the coast bit set to 0.
    * Note that it's impossible to land on Rock or Water tiles even if they have the coast bit set to 1.
## `objects_templates` (type [`h3m::ObjectTemplate`](../src/h3mtxt/Map/ObjectTemplate.h))
The Map Editor only supports "standard" object templates, but you can add custom ones (e.g., a `Prison` that looks like a hero); the Unleashed Editor also supports this.
## `objects` (type [`h3m::Object`](../src/h3mtxt/Map/Object.h))
* `ABANDONED_MINE`: `Wood` can be enabled as a potential resource.
* `ARTIFACT`: any signed 16-bit number can be used in `guardians.creatures.count` (e.g., 20,000 Peasants in a stack). The Map Editor only allows a number from [1; 9999].
* `EVENT`:
  * `guardians`: any signed 16-bit number can be used in `guardians.creatures.count` (e.g., 20,000 Peasants in a stack). The Map Editor only allows a number from [1; 9999].
  * `morale`: any signed 8-bit number can be used (e.g., -10 or +10). The Map Editor only allows a value from [-3; 3].
  * `luck`: any signed 8-bit number can be used (e.g., -10 or +10). The Map Editor only allows a value from [-3; 3].
  * `primary_skills`: The Map Editor only allows a value from [0; 99] for each skill, but any signed 8-bit number can be used for each skill (e.g., +127). Negative values are ignored (they have the same effect as 0). Note that the game uses modular arithmetic for primary skills: e.g., if the hero's Attack is currently 10 and the Event grants +127 Attack, the new value will become 0x89 == -119. By using 2 events, you can effectively decrease the value of the hero's primary skill: e.g., the first Event gives +127 Attack, the second gives +119 Attack; the combined effect will be -10 Attack.
  * `secondary_skills`: "hexed" skills can be used here.
  * `artifacts`: unusual artifacts (e.g., `Spellbook`) can be used here.
  * `spells`: `Titan's Lightning Bolt` can be used here.
  * `creatures`: unusual creatures (e.g., `Ballista`) can be used here.
  * In general, object overlap should be avoided (the Unleashed Editor triggers warnings for such objects), but **non-recurring** Events placed above an actionable object (e.g., Resource, Artifact, Learning Stone, etc) seem to have well-defined behavior. The underlying object is ignored initially; however, if you dig a hole on that cell (which implies that you have trigger the Event first), the object will become actionable. This has some interesting applications:
    * "Burying" artifacts/resources: for example, you can change the sprite of an artifact to mimic the adjacent obstacle, and place an Event above it. It won't be possible to pick up the artifact until you dig a hole on that cell. This is used on the map "Leon's Redemption" by Barbuta.
    * Constructing an obstacle blocking the way: for example, if you place an Event above a Learning Stone, heroes will be able to move vertically through that cell initially, but after you dig a hole on that cell this path will be blocked.
* `GARRISON`:
  * `creatures`: The Map Editor only allows values from [1; 9999] for the number of creatures in a stack, but any signed 16-bit integer can be used here. Stacks with negative numbers of creatures will be present in the garrison.
* `GRAIL`:
  *  `allowable_radius`: The Map Editor only allows values from [0; 127], but any 8-bit integer can be used here. The Map Editor interprets it as int8_t, but the game interprets it as uint8_t: 0xFF means 255, not -1.
* `HERO`:
  * Name and biography can be specified for a Random Hero.
  * A Random Hero can be put in a Prison.
  * `experience`: the Map Editor only allows values from [0; 99,999,999], but any signed 32-bit integer can be used here. Note that the game will freeze at start if you try to set a value >= 2,147,400,657. See [ExperienceLevels.h](../src/h3mtxt/Map/Constants/ExperienceLevels.h) for more details.
  * `secondary_skills`: "hexed" skills can be used here.
  * `creatures`: unusual creatures (e.g., `Ballista`) can be used here.
  * `artifacts`: unusual artifacts (e.g., `Spellbook`) can be placed in the backpack.
  * `patrol_radius`: the Map Editor only allows values from [0; 10] or 0xFF (no patrol), but any value from [-128; 127] can be used here:
    * Positive values are interpreted as the radius of the patrol circle.
    * 0 indicates that the hero will stand still.
    * Negative values indicate that the hero has no patrol, i.e. can go anywhere. Note that this is equivalent to 0xFF, so values [-128; -2] are rather useless - just use -1 instead, which is already supported by the Map Editor.
  * `primary_skills`: The Map Editor only allows a value from [0; 99] for each skill, but any signed 8-bit number can be used for each skill (e.g., +100 or -128).
* `MONSTER`:
  * `count`: The Map Editor only allows values from [0; 4000] (0 means random), but any 16-bit integer can be used here. However, in the game the number of creatures will be initialized with `count` MOD 4096 (4096 also means random), so values > 4095 are somewhat useless.
  * `message_and_treasure`:
    * `resources`: The Map Editor only allows values from [0; 99,999] for each resource, but any signed 32-bit integer can be used. Negative amounts cause you to lose resources, but your new amount will not go below 0.
    * `artifact`: unusual artifacts (e.g., `Spellbook`) can be used here.
* `PANDORAS_BOX`: see `EVENT`.
* `PLACEHOLDER_HERO`:
  * Have you noticed that crossover heroes in campaigns never start inside a town? The Map Editor doesn't support setting a hero placeholder as the visiting hero of a town, but it can be done.

    In order for a hero placeholder to start in the town, the coordinates of the Object representing it must be exactly the same as the coordinates of the town (this is the same as how it's done for normal visiting heroes). You can do this via the Unleashed Editor by manually moving the hero placeholder to the right tile, although the Unleashed Editor will trigger a warning about object overlap.

    Both the Map Editor and the Unleashed Editor incorrectly render such hero placeholders on top of the town, instead of displaying them as the visiting hero in the town settings.
* `QUEST_GUARD`:
  * `Level`: The Map Editor only allows values from [1; 99], but any signed 32-bit integer can be used here.
  * `PrimarySkills`: The Map Editor only allows values from [1; 99], but any signed 8-bit integer can be used here. Nonpositive values are ignored: e.g., even if the hero's Attack is -128, and the quest requires achieving -10 Attack, the game will consider that the hero has completed the quest.
  * `Artifacts`: unusual artifacts (e.g., `Spellbook`) can be used here.
  * `Creatures`:
    * `count`: The Map Editor only allows values from [1; 9999] for the number of creatures, but any unsigned 16-bit integer can be used here.
  * `Resources`: The Map Editor only allows values from [1; 99,999], but any signed 32-bit integer can be used here.
    * If the amount is negative for some resource, it won't be displayed as a part of the quest (equivalent to 0), but once you complete the quest your amount will increase.
    * If all amounts are <= 0, it is considered that you have completed the quest.
* `RESOURCE`:
  * `guardians`: any signed 16-bit number can be used in `creatures.count` (e.g., 20,000 Peasants in a stack). The Map Editor only allows a number from [1; 9,999].
  * `quantity`: The Map Editor only allows setting a value within [1; 99,999]. Values greater than 99,999 are OK, but the game uses `quantity` MOD 524,288, so the actual amount will always be within [1; 524,287] or Random.
* `SEERS_HUT`:
  * `quest`: see `QUEST` above.
  * `reward`:
    * `Experience`: The Map Editor only allows using values from [1; 99,999,999], but any signed 32-bit integer can be used here.
      * 0 has no effect (the hero's experience remains the same).
      * Negative experience points are handled correctly: the hero's experience decreases, and the level gets recalculated (i.e. the level can also decrease after the reward).
    * `SpellPoints`: The Map Editor only allows setting a value from [1; 999], but any signed 32-bit integer can be used here.
      * 0 is OK (no spell points granted).
      * Values greater than 999 seem to be OK, but you will only be granted 999 points anyway.
      * If the reward is -N spell points (N > 0) and the hero has N or more spell points, the hero will lose N spell points. However, if the hero has less than N spell points, the hero will *gain* 10 spell points instead.
    * `Morale`: The Map Editor only allows setting a value from [1; 3], but any signed 8-bit integer can be used here (e.g., +5 or -7).
    * `Luck`: The Map Editor only allows setting a value from [1; 3], but any signed 8-bit integer can be used here (e.g., +5 or -7).
    * `Resource`:
      * `amount`: The Map Editor only allow setting a value within [1; 32767], but any signed 32-bit integer can be used here.
        * 0 has no effect (no resources given).
        * Negative values reduce your current amount of this resource, but it won't go below 0.
    * `PrimarySkill`:
      * `value`: The Map Editor only allows using a value within [1; 99], but any signed 8-bit integer can be used here.
    * `SecondarySkill`: a "hexed" secondary skill can be granted here.
    * `Artifact`: unusual artifacts (e.g., `Spellbook`) can be used here.
    * `Spell`: `Titan's Lightning Bolt` can be granted.
    * `Creature`: `count` can be negative, in which case the number of creatures in your stack will decrease.
* `SHRINE`:
  * `spell`: The Map Editor only allows choosing a level N spell, where N it determined by the subtype of the Shrine (1, 2 or 3). However, you can set any spell here, including level 4 and level 5 spells (e.g., "Town Portal", "Fly", "Titan's Lightning Bolt").
* `SPELL_SCROLL`:
  * `guardians`: any signed 16-bit number can be used in `creatures.count` (e.g., 20,000 Peasants in a stack). The Map Editor only allows a number from [1; 9999].
  * `spell`: `Titan's Lightning Bolt` can be used here.
* `TOWN`:
  * `garrison`: The Map Editor only allows values from [1; 9,999] in each non-empty slot, but you can use any signed 16-bit integer. If `count` <= 0 for some slot, this slot will become empty when the game starts.
  * `buildings`:
    * `is_built `: you can set any building as prebuilt without its prerequisites. Note that both the Map Editor and the Unleashed Editor only have partial support for this; for example, you can set `Dragon Cave` as built in `Dungeon` without `Mage Guild Level 2`, but you cannot set `Mana Vortex` as built without `Mage Guild Level 1`. However, both programs will correctly display such data, and the game handles it fine. For example, you can:
      * Set `Resource Silo` as built without `Market`.
      * Set `Artifact Merchants` as built without `Market`.
      * Set `Mana Vortex` as built without `Mage Guild Level 1`.
      * Set `Treasury` as built without `Dwarf Cottage`.
      * Set `Skeleton Transformer` as built without `Cursed Temple`.

      Note that the prerequisite(s) will still be prebuilt automatically if the enabled building is an "upgrade"; for example:
        * Setting `Mage Guild Level 5` as built without the lower levels is equivalent to prebuilding all 5 levels.
        * Setting `Citadel` as built without `Fort` is equivalent to prebuilding both.
        * Setting `Upg. Dragon Cave` as built without `Dragon Cave` is equivalent to prebuilding both.
        * Setting `Mushroom Rings` as built without `Warren` is equivalent to prebuilding both.
        * Setting `Brotherhood of the Sword` as built without `Tavern` is equivalent to prebuilding both.

      This matches the definition of separate "structures" which is used by the game when computing damage from `Arrow Towers` (see the [definition](https://heroes.thelazy.net/index.php/Arrow_tower) on the unofficial Heroes 3 Wiki).

  * `events`:
    * See `global_events` below.
    * `buildings`: same as with `is_built` above, you can configure a timed event to build a building without its prerequisite(s), even if the Map Editor doesn't allow this (e.g., building `Artifact Merchants` without `Marketplace`).
    * `creatures`: The Map Editor only allows values from [0; 9,999] for each creature level, but you can use any 16-bit integer. The behavior for values > 32767 is inconsistent: the game interprets them as signed integers in some places, but as unsigned in the others.
* `WITCH_HUT`: The Map Editor forces you to enable at least 1 skill, but you can disable all of them. If all skills are disabled, the Witch Hut will teach you a random globally enabled skill. If all skills are globablly disabled, the Witch Hut will not teach you anything (the game will say that "it has been deserted for some time").
## `global_events` (type [`h3m::TimedEvent`](../src/h3mtxt/Map/TimedEvent.h))
* `day_of_first_occurence`: The Map Editor only allows setting a value from `[0; 671]`, i.e. a date within `["Month: 1, Week: 1, Day: 1", "Month: 24, Week: 4, Day: 7"]`. However, any signed 16-bit integer can be used here. Note that only values from `[-28; 32767]` (i.e. dates within `["Month: 0, Week: 1, Day: 1"; "Month: 1171, Week: 2, Day: 1"]`) are feasible: an event, whose day of first occurence is outside of this range, will never trigger.
  * "Time is a flat circle": `Month: 65535, Week: 4, Day: 7` is followed by `Month: 0, Week: 1, Day: 1`.
  * Events with the day of first occurence from `[-28; -1]` are extremely unlikely to trigger in any game, because they require 65535 months of gameplay.
* `repeat_after_days`:
  * The Map Editor only allows a number from a small set (0-7, 14, 21, 28), but any 16-bit integer can be used here.
  * 0 is used for non-recurring events, but due to the cyclical nature of time in HoMM3 even non-recurring events trigger again after 65536 months (because the date itself happens again).
